**CNM School of Liberal Arts (LA)**

**PHIL 1120: Logic, Reasoning, and Critical Thinking**

**I. GENERAL INFORMATION**

**Instructor:** Dr. Jaime Denison **Course/Section:** Phil 1120-101

**Office:** Main Campus, MS 5^th^ Floor **Term:** Fall 2024

**Office Hours:** Mondays, 12 pm -- 1 pm **Credit Hours:** 3

**Voicemail:** 224-4000 x53462 **E-mail:** jdenison1@cnm.edu

**CNM Brightspace:** mycourses.cnm.edu

**II. COURSE DESCRIPTION**

The purpose of this course is to teach students how to analyze,
critique, and construct arguments. The course includes an introductory
survey of important logical concepts and tools needed for argument
analysis and composition. These concepts and tools will be used to
examine select philosophical and scholarly texts. Students will be
required to compose several argument essays.

Pre- or corequisite: Reading & Writing Skills 2

If you disenroll from one of your co-requisite classes, you may be
dropped from the other course.

**III. TEXTBOOKS/MATERIALS**

Patrick Hurley, *A Concise Introduction to Logic*, fourteenth edition.
Cengage.

Note: You do not need Mindtap.

**IV. COURSE OUTCOMES\**

Upon completion of this course, students will be able to:

1\. Comprehend components of arguments.

2\. Acquire a general understanding of the essential logical concepts
needed for argument analysis, such as validity, soundness, deduction,
and induction.

3\. Critically assess arguments with an aim toward identifying what
constitutes effective and reasonable argument strategies.

4\. Learn to identify common logical fallacies.

5\. Apply knowledge of argumentation principles to philosophical and
scholarly texts.

6\. Learn to compose effective argument essays.

Essential Skills: Critical Thinking, Personal & Social Responsibility,
Information & Digital Literacy.

**\
V. COURSE REQUIREMENTS/ATTENDANCE**

**A. Course Requirements:**

This is a lecture course with room for discussion. Students are expected
to participate in class discussion in the context of assigned readings
and to respond to questions relevant to the readings. Students are also
expected to complete the following requirements to pass the course:

- Online Quizzes

- Class Activities and Homework

- Argument Analysis Paper

- Argument Paper

- Final Exam (focused on Deductive Reasoning)

**B. Attendance**

Students enrolled for credit, credit/no credit, or audit are expected to
attend all class sessions. The instructor will take attendance. You are
allowed up to three absences until your attendance grade will start to
be affected. A student with excessive absences---15% of total class
hours---may be dropped from the class. Students should not assume they
will be dropped from the class automatically. Absences do not relieve
students of the responsibility for missed assignments and exams.
Students must take the initiative in arranging with the instructor to
make up missed work.

**C. Special Accommodations**

CNM is committed to accessible learning environments that meet the needs
of its diverse students. If you anticipate or experience any barriers to
learning, discuss your concerns with the instructor or Accessibility
Services as soon as possible. Accessibility Services supports faculty in
designing accessible learning environments and assists students who have
disabilities with accommodations to remove barriers where they exist.
Students with disabilities are invited to get started with Accessibility
Services by filling out the "First Time Request for Accessibility
Services" at:
<https://cnm-accommodate.symplicity.com/public_accommodation/>. You may
contact the Accessibility Services office via their websites:
([www.cnm.edu/drc](http://www.cnm.edu/drc)) or
<https://www.cnm.edu/depts/accessibility-services>, by phone:
505.224.3259, or email:  <DRCStart@cnm.edu>). They are located in room
209 in the Student Services Center (SSC) at Main campus.

**VI. GRADING**

LA grading scale:\
90-100%=A

80-89%=B

70-79%=C

60-69%=D

below 60%=F

The final grade will be calculated based on the following categories:

- Online Quizzes = 20%

- Class Activities and Homework = 20%

- Argument Analysis Paper = 20%

- Argument Paper = 20%

- Final Exam = 20%

It is LA policy that all courses require final examination/project.

In the event CNM closes during the final week of classes, final grades
for students will be calculated based on all work assessed up to that
point in the course.

Students should become familiar with the CNM Academic Integrity Policy:
[[https://www.cnm.edu/depts/dean-of-students/academic-integrity-policy]{.underline}](https://www.cnm.edu/depts/dean-of-students/academic-integrity-policy)

**VII. OTHER:**

*Class Policies:* Please keep a record of your scores, and keep all
graded work until your grade has been reported. Keep a hardcopy and/or
electronic copy of papers that you turn in.  All papers will be
submitted into Brightspace in their appropriate folders.  Do not drop
papers off at the LA office or other faculty office unless asked to do
so. Do not email work without prior arrangement. Graded work sent by
email will be confirmed by email, so if there is no answer assume it was
not received.

Turn off or silence cell phones and other electronic devices and remove
headsets during class. Use of laptops and PDA's is according to the
discretion of the Instructor.

Please do not leave class early or close up bags and put on coats in the
final moments of class. The instructor will end the class. Please keep
trips to the restroom to a minimum.

*Technical Help:* For technical help, contact the CNM ITS Service Desk
<https://www.cnm.edu/depts/information-technology-services>, Or call:
505-224-HELP. Email: <itsservicedesk@cnm.edu>

**Brightspace Support**: Brightspace support if available 24/7. You can
request help at any time while logged in to Brightspace. Go to the "Get
Help" icon on the bottom right of the screen. Support is available via
chat, email and phone.

*Plagiarism:* All work in this class must be your own and any outside
sources used must be cited appropriately. Any student caught
plagiarizing in this course faces an immediate penalty of a zero for the
assignment, and incidents of cheating will be reported to the office of
the Dean of Students. In short, submit your own work, and if you are
tempted to cheat, please see me instead. It is the responsibility of the
student to understand what plagiarism is and to learn how to use the
thoughts and words of others in his or her work with proper methods of
citation.

*Use of AI:* ChatGPT and other programs like it are an emerging
technology with potentially widespread uses and impacts on everyone's
jobs and lives. ChatGPT can be a valuable tool--if used correctly. Any
assignments submitted for this course should primarily be your own
work--any use of AI technology should supplement your own ideas and
research. Otherwise, *I assume that any work with your name on it was
authored by you. If you did not write the paper or project, you are in
violation of academic honesty policies and may be penalized, up to
potentially receiving a 0 for the assignment.* 

All that said, keep the following in mind if you use AI: 

- **Don't simply trust what it says**. You must verify facts, data,
  sources, and quotations it gives you. ChatGPT routinely generates
  material that looks accurate but is erroneous or fictitious. You are
  responsible for the accuracy and truth in your work, so always *check
  your sources carefully*. 

- **Don't let ChatGPT think for you**. AI technology is a tool. As with
  all tools---like cell phones and chainsaws and toaster ovens--the
  results are best when the user knows how to use them correctly and
  responsibly. I want to hear what you have to say, not what an LLM has
  to say. I find that work you write yourself, in your own voice, is far
  more interesting and engaging than what a computer generates. Hint: it
  also tends to earn higher grades. Also, part of the learning process
  in college is learning through writing and research, and therefore you
  are bypassing the purpose of your coursework by defaulting to such
  tools to do this work for you.

- **If you use it, acknowledge it**. If AI generated any part of the
  work you are submitting, you must acknowledge use of it as a source.
  Put the AI-generated work in quotation marks and provide an in-text
  citation noting what site you used to develop that content, and in
  response to what instructions.  

*Instructor Communication Policy*: Emails and messages will be responded
to within 24 hours Monday-Thursday, and within 48 hours Friday-Sunday.
If there are circumstances where I will not be able to respond within my
normal window of time, I will make a course announcement explaining the
circumstances.

*CNM Safe Zone*: As a Safe Zone-certified faculty member, I am available
to listen and support you in a safe and confidential manner. I can also
help you connect with resources on campus to address any problems you
may face that interfere with your success at CNM as it relates to issues
surrounding sexual orientation and gender identity. Also, if you have a
name or pronouns not reflected in your official CNM records, please
don't hesitate to let me know. My goal is to help all students be
successful and to maintain a safe and equitable campus.

*CNM Title IX Statement:* Central New Mexico Community College (CNM)
does not discriminate based on sex and prohibits sex discrimination in
any educational program or activity it operates, in compliance
with Title IX. This includes admissions and employment. For inquiries
regarding the application of Title IX, contact CNM\'s Title IX
Coordinators or the Office of Civil Rights. The
college's Title IX nondiscrimination policy and grievance procedures are
available on the CNM Title IX Policy and Procedures
webpage: [https://www.cnm.edu/about-cnm/[title]{.underline}-[ix]{.underline}-policy-and-procedures](https://www.cnm.edu/about-cnm/title-ix-policy-and-procedures).

**\
VIII. SCHEDULE OF ASSIGNMENTS/READINGS**

**[Week 1: August 26 -- September 1]{.underline}**

[Monday, August 26]{.underline}

Introduction: What is Logic?

[Wednesday, August 28:]{.underline}

Reading: Chapter 1: Basic Concepts (1.1, 1.2)

Topic: Elements of an Argument

**[Week 2: September 2 -- September 8]{.underline}**

[Monday, September 2:]{.underline}

**National Holiday**

[Wednesday, September 4:]{.underline}

Reading: Chapter 1: Basic Concepts (1.3,1.4)

Topic: Deduction and Induction

**[Week 3: September 9 -- September 15]{.underline}**

[Monday, September 9:]{.underline}

Reading: Chapter 1: Basic Concepts (1.5,1.6)

Topic: Invalidity and Extended Arguments

[Wednesday, September 11:]{.underline}

Reading: Chapter 2: Language: Meaning and Definition (2.1, 2.2)

Topic: Semantics

**Online Quiz 1 Due September 13**

**[Week 4: September 16 -- September 22]{.underline}**

[Monday, September 16:]{.underline}

Reading: Chapter 2: Language: Meaning and Definition (2.3, 2.4, 2.5)

Topic: Definitions

[Wednesday, September 18:]{.underline}

Reading: Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies (3.1, 3.2)

Topic: Fallacies of Relevance

**Online Quiz 2 Due September 20**

**[Week 5: September 23 -- September 29]{.underline}**

[Monday, September 23:]{.underline}

Reading: Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies (3.3, 3.4, 3.5)

Topic: Fallacies of Weak Induction & Ambiguity

[\
Wednesday, September 25:]{.underline}

Reading: PDF Packet on Cognitive Biases: Sections 4.1, 4.2

Topic: Understanding Cognitive Biases

**[Week 6: September 30 -- October 6]{.underline}**

[Monday, September 30:]{.underline}

Reading: PDF Packet on Cognitive Biases: Sections 4.3, 4.4, 4.5

Topic: Countering Cognitive Biases

[Wednesday, October 2:]{.underline}

Reading: Chapter 9: Analogy and Legal and Moral Reasoning (9.1)

Topic: Analogical Reasoning

**Online Quiz 3 Due October 4**

**[Week 7: October 7 -- October 13]{.underline}**

[Monday, October 7:]{.underline}

Reading: Chapter 9: Analogy and Legal and Moral Reasoning (9.2, 9.3)

Topic: Legal and Moral Reasoning

[Wednesday, October 9:]{.underline}

Reading: Chapter 10: Causality and Mill's Methods (10.1)

Topic: "Causation" and Necessary and Sufficient Conditions

**Online Quiz 4 Due October 11**

**Argument Analysis Due October 12**

**[Week 8: October 14 -- October 20]{.underline}**

[Monday, October 14:]{.underline}

Reading: Chapter 10: Causality and Mill's Methods (10.2)

Topic: Mill's Methods

[Wednesday, October 16:]{.underline}

Reading: Chapter 11: Probability (11.1)

Topic: Theories of Probability

**Online Quiz 5 Due October 18**

**[Week 9: October 21 -- October 27]{.underline}**

[Monday, October 21:]{.underline}

Reading: Chapter 11: Probability (11.2)

Topic: Probability Calculus

[Wednesday, October 23:]{.underline}

Reading: Chapter 12: Statistical Reasoning (12.1, 12.2, 12.3, 12.4)

Topic: Samples and Averages

**[\
Week 10: October 28 -- November 3]{.underline}**

[Monday, October 28:]{.underline}

Reading: Chapter 12: Statistical Reasoning (12.5, 12.6)

Topic: Dispersion and Percentages

[Wednesday, October 30:]{.underline}

Reading: Chapter 13: Hypothetical/Scientific Reasoning

Topic: Hypothetical Reasoning

**[Week 11: November 4 -- November 10]{.underline}**

[Monday, November 4:]{.underline}

Reading: Chapter 4: Categorical Propositions (4.1, 4.2)

Topic: Components of a Categorical Proposition

[Wednesday, November 6:]{.underline}

Reading: Chapter 4: Categorical Propositions (4.3, 4.4)

Topic: Venn Diagrams and Immediate Inferences in the Boolean Standpoint

**Online Quiz 6 Due November 8**

**Argument Paper Due November 9**

**[Week 12: November 11 -- November 17]{.underline}**

[Monday, November 11:]{.underline}

Reading: Chapter 4: Categorical Propositions (4.5, 4.6, 4.7)

Topic: The Aristotelian View

[Wednesday, November 13:]{.underline}

Reading: Chapter 5: Categorical Syllogisms (5.1, 5.2)

Topic: Components of the Syllogism and Venn Diagrams

**Online Quiz 7 Due November 15**

**[Week 13: November 18 -- November 24]{.underline}**

[Monday, November 18:]{.underline}

Reading: Chapter 5: Categorical Syllogisms (5.3, 5.6)

Topic: Rules and Fallacies

[Wednesday, November 20:]{.underline}

Reading: Chapter 6: Propositional Logic (6.1, 6.2)

Topic: Truth Functions

**Online Quiz 8 Due November 22**

**[Week 14: November 25 -- December 1]{.underline}**

[Monday, November 25:]{.underline}

Reading: Chapter 6: Propositional Logic (6.3, 6.4)

Topic: Truth Tables

[\
Wednesday, November 27:]{.underline}

Reading: Chapter 6: Propositional Logic (6.5, 6.6)

Topic: Argument Forms and Fallacies

**[Week 15: December 2 -- December 7]{.underline}**

[Monday, December 2:]{.underline}

Topic: Wrapping Up

[Wednesday, December 4:]{.underline}

**Final Exam**
